# Enable TLS for MySQL Router K8s

This is part of the [Charmed MySQL Tutorial](/t/12176). Please refer to this page for more information and the overview of the content.

## Transport Layer Security (TLS)
[TLS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security) is used to encrypt data exchanged between two applications; it secures data transmitted over the network. Typically, enabling TLS within a highly available database, and between a highly available database and client/server applications, requires domain-specific knowledge and a high level of expertise. Fortunately, the domain-specific knowledge has been encoded into Router K8s and Charmed MySQL K8s. This means (re-)configuring TLS is readily available and requires minimal effort on your end.

Again, relations come in handy here as TLS is enabled via relations; i.e. by relating operators to the [TLS Certificates Charm](https://charmhub.io/tls-certificates-operator). The TLS Certificates Charm centralises TLS certificate management in a consistent manner and handles providing, requesting, and renewing TLS certificates.


### Configure TLS
Before enabling TLS on Charmed MySQL K8s we must first deploy the `tls-certificates-operator` charm:
```shell
juju deploy tls-certificates-operator --config generate-self-signed-certificates="true" --config ca-common-name="Tutorial CA" --channel "legacy/stable"
```

Wait until the `tls-certificates-operator` is up and active, use `juju status --watch 1s` to monitor the progress:
```shell
TODO
```
*Note: this tutorial uses [self-signed certificates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-signed_certificate); self-signed certificates should not be used in a production cluster.*

### Add external TLS certificate
To enable TLS on MySQL Router, relate the two applications:
```shell
juju relate mysql-router-k8s tls-certificates-operator
```
#### Check the TLS certificate in use:
Use `openssl` to connect to the MySQL through MySQL Router and check the TLS certificate in use:
```shell
> openssl s_client -starttls mysql -connect 10.1.84.74:3306 | grep Issuer
...
depth=1 C = US, CN = Tutorial CA
...
```
Congratulations! Your connection is now using TLS certificate generated by the external application `tls-certificates-operator`.


### Remove external TLS certificate
To remove the external TLS and return to the locally generate one, unrelate applications:
```shell
juju remove-relation mysql-router-k8s tls-certificates-operator
```

#### Check the TLS certificate in use:
```shell
> openssl s_client -starttls mysql -connect 10.1.84.74:3306 | grep Issuer
```

The output should be similar to:
```shell
...
Issuer: CN = MySQL_Server_8.0.31_Auto_Generated_CA_Certificate
...
```
The MySQL Router K8s application reverted to the certificate that was created locally during the MySQL server installation.